Data Structures
And
Algorithms
Made Easy In JAVA
Data Structures and Algorithmic Puzzles

By
Narasimha Karumanchi

Copyright ©2017 by CareerMonk.com
All rights reserved.
Designed by Narasimha Karumanchi

Copyright ©2017 CareerMonk Publications. All rights reserved.
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced in any form or by any electronic or mechanical means, including
information storage and retrieval systems, without written permission from the publisher or author.

Acknowledgements
Mother and Father, it is impossible to thank you adequately for everything you have done, from
loving me unconditionally to raising me in a stable household, where your persistent efforts and
traditional values taught your children to celebrate and embrace life. I could not have asked for
better parents or role-models. You showed me that anything is possible with faith, hard work and
determination.
This book would not have been possible without the help of many people. I would like to express
my gratitude to all of the people who provided support, talked things over, read, wrote, offered
comments, allowed me to quote their remarks and assisted in the editing, proofreading and design.
In particular, I would like to thank the following individuals:
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■

Mohan Mullapudi, IIT Bombay, Architect, dataRPM Pvt. Ltd.
Navin Kumar Jaiswal, Senior Consultant, Juniper Networks Inc.
A. Vamshi Krishna, IIT Kanpur, Mentor Graphics Inc.
Kondrakunta Murali Krishna, B-Tech., Technical Lead, HCL
Cathy Reed, BA, MA, Copy Editor
Prof. Girish P. Saraph, Founder, Vegayan Systems, IIT Bombay
Kishore Kumar Jinka, IIT Bombay
Prof. Hsin – mu Tsai, National Taiwan University, Taiwan
Prof. Chintapalli Sobhan Babu. IIT, Hyderabad
Prof. Meda Sreenivasa Rao, JNTU, Hyderabad

Last but not least, I would like to thank the Directors of Guntur Vikas College, Prof. Y.V. Gopala
Krishna Murthy & Prof. Ayub Khan [ACE Engineering Academy], T.R.C.Bose [Ex. Director of
APTransco], Ch.Venkateswara Rao VNR Vignanajyothi [Engineering College, Hyderabad],
Ch.Venkata Narasaiah [IPS], Yarapathineni Lakshmaiah [Manchikallu, Gurazala], & all our
well – wishers for helping me and my family during our studies.
-Narasimha Karumanchi
M-Tech, IIT Bombay
Founder, CareerMonk.com

Preface
Dear Reader,
Please hold on! I know many people typically do not read the Preface of a book. But I strongly
recommend that you read this particular Preface.
It is not the main objective of this book to present you with the theorems and proofs on data
structures and algorithms. I have followed a pattern of improving the problem solutions with
different complexities (for each problem, you will find multiple solutions with different, and
reduced, complexities). Basically, it’s an enumeration of possible solutions. With this approach,
even if you get a new question, it will show you a way to think about the possible solutions. You
will find this book useful for interview preparation, competitive exams preparation, and campus
interview preparations.
As a job seeker, if you read the complete book, I am sure you will be able to challenge the
interviewers. If you read it as an instructor, it will help you to deliver lectures with an approach
that is easy to follow, and as a result your students will appreciate the fact that they have opted for
Computer Science / Information Technology as their degree.
This book is also useful for Engineering degree students and Masters degree students during
their academic preparations. In all the chapters you will see that there is more emphasis on
problems and their analysis rather than on theory. In each chapter, you will first read about the
basic required theory, which is then followed by a section on problem sets. In total, there are
approximately 700 algorithmic problems, all with solutions.
If you read the book as a student preparing for competitive exams for Computer Science /
Information Technology, the content covers all the required topics in full detail. While writing
this book, my main focus was to help students who are preparing for these exams.
In all the chapters you will see more emphasis on problems and analysis rather than on theory. In
each chapter, you will first see the basic required theory followed by various problems.
For many problems, multiple solutions are provided with different levels of complexity. We start
with the brute force solution and slowly move toward the best solution possible for that problem.
For each problem, we endeavor to understand how much time the algorithm takes and how much
memory the algorithm uses.

It is recommended that the reader does at least one complete reading of this book to gain a full
understanding of all the topics that are covered. Then, in subsequent readings you can skip
directly to any chapter to refer to a specific topic. Even though many readings have been done for
the purpose of correcting errors, there could still be some minor typos in the book. If any are
found, they will be updated at www.CareerMonk.com. You can monitor this site for any
corrections and also for new problems and solutions. Also, please provide your valuable
suggestions at: Info@CareerMonk.com.
I wish you all the best and I am confident that you will find this book useful.
-Narasimha Karumanchi
M-Tech, IIT Bombay
Founder, CareerMonk.com

Other Books by Narasimha Karumanchi
IT Interview Questions
Elements of Computer Networking
Data Structures and Algorithmic Thinking with Python
Data Structures and Algorithms Made Easy (C/C++)
Coding Interview Questions
Data Structures and Algorithms for GATE
Peeling Design Patterns

Table of Contents
1.

Introduction
1.1

Variables

1.2

Data Types

1.3

Data Structure

1.4

Abstract Data Types (ADTs)

1.5
1.6

What is an Algorithm?
Why the Analysis of Algorithms?

1.7

Goal of the Analysis of Algorithms

1.8

What is Running Time Analysis?

1.9 How to Compare Algorithms
1.10 What is Rate of Growth?
1.11 Commonly used Rates of Growth
1.12 Types of Analysis
1.13 Asymptotic Notation
1.14 Big-O Notation
1.15 Omega-Ω Notation
1.16 Theta-Θ Notation
1.17 Important Notes
1.18 Why is it called Asymptotic Analysis?
1.19 Guidelines for Asymptotic Analysis
1.20 Properties of Notations
1.21 Commonly used Logarithms and Summations
1.22 Master Theorem for Divide and Conquer
1.23 Divide and Conquer Master Theorem: Problems & Solutions
1.24 Master Theorem for Subtract and Conquer Recurrences
1.25 Variant of Subtraction and Conquer Master Theorem
1.26 Method of Guessing and Confirming

1.27 Amortized Analysis
1.28 Algorithms Analysis: Problems & Solutions
2. Recursion and Backtracking
2.1
2.2

Introduction
What is Recursion?

2.3

Why Recursion?

2.4
2.5

Format of a Recursive Function
Recursion and Memory (Visualization)

2.6

Recursion versus Iteration

2.7

Notes on Recursion

2.8
2.9

Example Algorithms of Recursion
Recursion: Problems & Solutions

2.10 What is Backtracking?
2.11 Example Algorithms of Backtracking
2.12 Backtracking: Problems & Solutions
3. Linked Lists
3.1 What is a Linked List?
3.2

Linked Lists ADT

3.3

Why Linked Lists?

3.4
3.5

Arrays Overview
Comparison of Linked Lists with Arrays & Dynamic Arrays

3.6

Singly Linked Lists

3.7
3.8

Doubly Linked Lists
Circular Linked Lists

3.9

A Memory-efficient Doubly Linked List

3.10 Unrolled Linked Lists
3.11 Skip Lists
3.12 Linked Lists: Problems & Solutions
4. Stacks
4.1

What is a Stack?

4.2

How Stacks are used

4.3

Stack ADT

4.4

Exceptions

4.5
4.6

Applications
Implementation

4.7

Comparison of Implementations

4.8

Stacks: Problems & Solutions

5. Queues
5.1
5.2

What is a Queue?
How are Queues Used

5.3

Queue ADT

5.4

Exceptions

5.5
5.6

Applications
Implementation

5.7

Queues: Problems & Solutions

6. Trees
6.1

What is a Tree?

6.2
6.3

Glossary
Binary Trees

6.4

Binary Tree Traversals

6.5

Generic Trees (N-ary Trees)

6.6
6.7

Threaded Binary Tree Traversals (Stack or Queue-less Traversals)
Expression Trees

6.8

XOR Trees

6.9 Binary Search Trees (BSTs)
6.10 Balanced Binary Search Trees
6.11 AVL (Adelson-Velskii and Landis) Trees
6.12 Other Variations on Trees
7. Priority Queues and Heaps
7.1
7.2

What is a Priority Queue?
Priority Queue ADT

7.3

Priority Queue Applications

7.4

Priority Queue Implementations

7.5

Heaps and Binary Heaps

7.6

Binary Heaps

7.7

Priority Queues [Heaps]: Problems & Solutions

8. Disjoint Sets ADT
8.1
8.2

Introduction
Equivalence Relations and Equivalence Classes

8.3

Disjoint Sets ADT

8.4
8.5

Applications
Tradeoffs in Implementing Disjoint Sets ADT

8.6

Fast UNION Implementation (Slow FIND)

8.7

Fast UNION Implementations (Quick FIND)

8.8
8.9

Path Compression
Summary

8.10 Disjoint Sets: Problems & Solutions
9. Graph Algorithms
9.1

Introduction

9.2
9.3

Glossary
Applications of Graphs

9.4

Graph Representation

9.5

Graph Traversals

9.6
9.7

Topological Sort
Shortest Path Algorithms

9.8

Minimal Spanning Tree

9.9

Graph Algorithms: Problems & Solutions

10. Sorting
10.1
10.2

What is Sorting?
Why is Sorting Necessary?

10.3

Classification of Sorting Algorithms

10.4
10.5

Other Classifications
Bubble Sort

10.6

Selection Sort

10.7

Insertion Sort

10.8

Shell Sort

10.9

Merge Sort

10.10 Heap Sort
10.11 Quick Sort
10.12 Tree Sort
10.13 Comparison of Sorting Algorithms
10.14 Linear Sorting Algorithms
10.15 Counting Sort
10.16 Bucket Sort (or Bin Sort)
10.17 Radix Sort
10.18 Topological Sort
10.19 External Sorting
10.20 Sorting: Problems & Solutions
11. Searching
11.1

What is Searching?

11.2
11.3

Why do we need Searching?
Types of Searching

11.4

Unordered Linear Search

11.5
11.6

Sorted/Ordered Linear Search
Binary Search

11.7

Interpolation Search

11.8

Comparing Basic Searching Algorithms

11.9 Symbol Tables and Hashing
11.10 String Searching Algorithms
11.11 Searching: Problems & Solutions
12. Selection Algorithms [Medians]
12.1

What are Selection Algorithms?

12.2
12.3

Selection by Sorting
Partition-based Selection Algorithm

12.4

Linear Selection Algorithm - Median of Medians Algorithm

12.5
12.6

Finding the K Smallest Elements in Sorted Order
Selection Algorithms: Problems & Solutions

13. Symbol Tables

13.1

Introduction

13.2
13.3

What are Symbol Tables?
Symbol Table Implementations

13.4

Comparison Table of Symbols for Implementations

14. Hashing
14.1

What is Hashing?

14.2
14.3

Why Hashing?
HashTable ADT

14.4

Understanding Hashing

14.5

Components of Hashing

14.6
14.7

Hash Table
Hash Function

14.8

Load Factor

14.9

Collisions

14.10 Collision Resolution Techniques
14.11 Separate Chaining
14.12 Open Addressing
14.13 Comparison of Collision Resolution Techniques
14.14 How Hashing Gets O(1) Complexity?
14.15 Hashing Techniques
14.16 Problems for which Hash Tables are not suitable
14.17 Bloom Filters
14.18 Hashing: Problems & Solutions
15. String Algorithms
15.1

Introduction

15.2

String Matching Algorithms

15.3
15.4

Brute Force Method
Rabin-Karp String Matching Algorithm

15.5

String Matching with Finite Automata

15.6
15.7

KMP Algorithm
Boyer-Moore Algorithm

15.8

Data Structures for Storing Strings

15.9

Hash Tables for Strings

15.10 Binary Search Trees for Strings
15.11 Tries
15.12 Ternary Search Trees
15.13 Comparing BSTs, Tries and TSTs
15.14 Suffix Trees
15.15 String Algorithms: Problems & Solutions
16. Algorithms Design Techniques
16.1

Introduction

16.2

Classification

16.3
16.4

Classification by Implementation Method
Classification by Design Method

16.5

Other Classifications

17. Greedy Algorithms
17.1

Introduction

17.2
17.3

Greedy Strategy
Elements of Greedy Algorithms

17.4

Does Greedy Always Work?

17.5

Advantages and Disadvantages of Greedy Method

17.6
17.7

Greedy Applications
Understanding Greedy Technique

17.8

Greedy Algorithms: Problems & Solutions

18. Divide and Conquer Algorithms
18.1

Introduction

18.2
18.3

What is Divide and Conquer Strategy?
Does Divide and Conquer Always Work?

18.4

Divide and Conquer Visualization

18.5
18.6

Understanding Divide and Conquer
Advantages of Divide and Conquer

18.7

Disadvantages of Divide and Conquer

18.8

Master Theorem

18.9

Divide and Conquer Applications

18.10 Divide and Conquer: Problems & Solutions
19. Dynamic Programming
19.1

Introduction

19.2
19.3

What is Dynamic Programming Strategy?
Properties of Dynamic Programming Strategy

19.4

Can Dynamic Programming Solve All Problems?

19.5
19.6

Dynamic Programming Approaches
Examples of Dynamic Programming Algorithms

19.7

Understanding Dynamic Programming

19.8

Dynamic Programming: Problems & Solutions

20. Complexity Classes
20.1

Introduction

20.2
20.3

Polynomial/Exponential Time
What is a Decision Problem?

20.4

Decision Procedure

20.5
20.6

What is a Complexity Class?
Types of Complexity Classes

20.7

Reductions

20.8

Complexity Classes: Problems & Solutions

21. Miscellaneous Concepts
21.1
21.2

Introduction
Hacks on Bitwise Programming

21.3

Other Programming Questions

22. References

The objective of this chapter is to explain the importance of the analysis of algorithms, their
notations, relationships and solving as many problems as possible. Let us first focus on
understanding the basic elements of algorithms, the importance of algorithm analysis, and then
slowly move toward the other topics as mentioned above. After completing this chapter, you
should be able to find the complexity of any given algorithm (especially recursive functions).

1.1 Variables
Before getting in to the definition of variables, let us relate them to an old mathematical equation.
Many of us would have solved many mathematical equations since childhood. As an example,
consider the equation below:

We don’t have to worry about the use of this equation. The important thing that we need to
understand is that the equation has names (x and y), which hold values (data). That means the
names (x and y) are placeholders for representing data. Similarly, in computer science
programming we need something for holding data, and variables is the way to do that.

1.2 Data Types
In the above-mentioned equation, the variables x and y can take any values such as integral
numbers (10, 20), real numbers (0.23, 5.5), or just 0 and 1. To solve the equation, we need to
relate them to the kind of values they can take, and data type is the name used in computer science
programming for this purpose. A data type in a programming language is a set of data with
predefined values. Examples of data types are: integer, floating point, unit number, character,
string, etc.
Computer memory is all filled with zeros and ones. If we have a problem and we want to code it,
it’s very difficult to provide the solution in terms of zeros and ones. To help users, programming
languages and compilers provide us with data types. For example, integer takes 2 bytes (actual
value depends on compiler), float takes 4 bytes, etc. This says that in memory we are combining
2 bytes (16 bits) and calling it an integer. Similarly, combining 4 bytes (32 bits) and calling it a
float. A data type reduces the coding effort. At the top level, there are two types of data types:
•
•

System-defined data types (also called Primitive data types)
User-defined data types.

System-defined data types (Primitive data types)
Data types that are defined by system are called primitive data types. The primitive data types
provided by many programming languages are: int, float, char, double, bool, etc. The number of
bits allocated for each primitive data type depends on the programming languages, the compiler
and the operating system. For the same primitive data type, different languages may use different
sizes. Depending on the size of the data types, the total available values (domain) will also
change. For example, “int” may take 2 bytes or 4 bytes. If it takes 2 bytes (16 bits), then the total
possible values are minus 32,768 to plus 32,767 (-215 to 215-1). If it takes 4 bytes (32 bits), then
the possible values are between –2,147,483,648 and +2,147,483,647 (-231 to 231-1). The same is
the case with other data types.

User-defined data types
If the system-defined data types are not enough, then most programming languages allow the users
to define their own data types, called user – defined data types. Good examples of user defined
data types are: structures in C/C + + and classes in Java. For example, in the snippet below, we

are combining many system-defined data types and calling the user defined data type by the name
“newType”. This gives more flexibility and comfort in dealing with computer memory.

1.3 Data Structure
Based on the discussion above, once we have data in variables, we need some mechanism for
manipulating that data to solve problems. Data structure is a particular way of storing and
organizing data in a computer so that it can be used efficiently. A data structure is a special
format for organizing and storing data. General data structure types include arrays, files, linked
lists, stacks, queues, trees, graphs and so on.
Depending on the organization of the elements, data structures are classified into two types:
1)

2)

Linear data structures: Elements are accessed in a sequential order but it is not
compulsory to store all elements sequentially (say, Linked Lists). Examples: Linked
Lists, Stacks and Queues.
Non – linear data structures: Elements of this data structure are stored/accessed in a
non-linear order. Examples: Trees and graphs.

1.4 Abstract Data Types (ADTs)
Before defining abstract data types, let us consider the different view of system-defined data
types. We all know that, by default, all primitive data types (int, float, etc.) support basic
operations such as addition and subtraction. The system provides the implementations for the
primitive data types. For user-defined data types we also need to define operations. The
implementation for these operations can be done when we want to actually use them. That means,
in general, user defined data types are defined along with their operations.
To simplify the process of solving problems, we combine the data structures with their operations
and we call this Abstract Data Types (ADTs). An ADT consists of two parts:
1.
2.

Declaration of data
Declaration of operations

Commonly used ADTs include: Linked Lists, Stacks, Queues, Priority Queues, Binary Trees,
Dictionaries, Disjoint Sets (Union and Find), Hash Tables, Graphs, and many others. For
example, stack uses a LIFO (Last-In-First-Out) mechanism while storing the data in data
structures. The last element inserted into the stack is the first element that gets deleted. Common
operations are: creating the stack, push an element onto the stack, pop an element from the stack,
finding the current top of the stack, finding the number of elements in the stack, etc.
While defining the ADTs do not worry about the implementation details. They come into the
picture only when we want to use them. Different kinds of ADTs are suited to different kinds of
applications, and some are highly specialized to specific tasks. By the end of this book, we will
go through many of them and you will be in a position to relate the data structures to the kind of
problems they solve.

1.5 What is an Algorithm?
Let us consider the problem of preparing an omelette. To prepare an omelette, we follow the
steps given below:
1)
2)

3)

Get the frying pan.
Get the oil.
a. Do we have oil?
i. If yes, put it in the pan.
ii. If no, do we want to buy oil?
1. If yes, then go out and buy.
2. If no, we can terminate.
Turn on the stove, etc...

What we are doing is, for a given problem (preparing an omelette), we are providing a step-bystep procedure for solving it. The formal definition of an algorithm can be stated as:

In the traditional study of algorithms, there are two main criteria for judging the merits of
algorithms: correctness (does the algorithm give solution to the problem in a finite number of
steps?) and efficiency (how much resources (in terms of memory and time) does it take to execute
the).
Note: We do not have to prove each step of the algorithm.

1.6 Why the Analysis of Algorithms?
To go from city “A” to city “B”, there can be many ways of accomplishing this: by flight, by bus,

by train and also by bicycle. Depending on the availability and convenience, we choose the one
that suits us. Similarly, in computer science, multiple algorithms are available for solving the
same problem (for example, a sorting problem has many algorithms, like insertion sort, selection
sort, quick sort and many more). Algorithm analysis helps us to determine which algorithm is
most efficient in terms of time and space consumed.

1.7 Goal of the Analysis of Algorithms
The goal of the analysis of algorithms is to compare algorithms (or solutions) mainly in terms of
running time but also in terms of other factors (e.g., memory, developer effort, etc.)

1.8 What is Running Time Analysis?
It is the process of determining how processing time increases as the size of the problem (input
size) increases. Input size is the number of elements in the input, and depending on the problem
type, the input may be of different types. The following are the common types of inputs.
•
•
•
•
•

Size of an array
Polynomial degree
Number of elements in a matrix
Number of bits in the binary representation of the input
Vertices and edges in a graph.

1.9 How to Compare Algorithms
To compare algorithms, let us define a few objective measures:
Execution times? Not a good measure as execution times are specific to a particular computer.
Number of statements executed? Not a good measure, since the number of statements varies
with the programming language as well as the style of the individual programmer.
Ideal solution? Let us assume that we express the running time of a given algorithm as a function
of the input size n (i.e., f(n)) and compare these different functions corresponding to running
times. This kind of comparison is independent of machine time, programming style, etc.

1.10 What is Rate of Growth?
The rate at which the running time increases as a function of input is called rate of growth. Let us
assume that you go to a shop to buy a car and a bicycle. If your friend sees you there and asks

what you are buying, then in general you say buying a car. This is because the cost of the car is
high compared to the cost of the bicycle (approximating the cost of the bicycle to the cost of the
car).

For the above-mentioned example, we can represent the cost of the car and the cost of the bicycle
in terms of function, and for a given function ignore the low order terms that are relatively
insignificant (for large value of input size, n). As an example, in the case below, n4, 2n2, 100n
and 500 are the individual costs of some function and approximate to n4 since n4 is the highest
rate of growth.

1.11 Commonly used Rates of Growth
Below is the list of growth rates you will come across in the following chapters.

The diagram below shows the relationship between different rates of growth.

1.12 Types of Analysis
To analyze the given algorithm, we need to know with which inputs the algorithm takes less time
(performing well) and with which inputs the algorithm takes a long time. We have already seen
that an algorithm can be represented in the form of an expression. That means we represent the
algorithm with multiple expressions: one for the case where it takes less time and another for the
case where it takes more time.

In general, the first case is called the best case and the second case is called the worst case for
the algorithm. To analyze an algorithm we need some kind of syntax, and that forms the base for
asymptotic analysis/notation. There are three types of analysis:
•

•

•

Worst case
○
Defines the input for which the algorithm takes a long time (slowest
time to complete).
○
Input is the one for which the algorithm runs the slowest.
Best case
○
Defines the input for which the algorithm takes the least time (fastest
time to complete).
○
Input is the one for which the algorithm runs the fastest.
Average case
○
Provides a prediction about the running time of the algorithm.
○
Run the algorithm many times, using many different inputs that come
from some distribution that generates these inputs, compute the total
running time (by adding the individual times), and divide by the
number of trials.
○
Assumes that the input is random.

For a given algorithm, we can represent the best, worst and average cases in the form of
expressions. As an example, let f(n) be the function, which represents the given algorithm.

Similarly for the average case. The expression defines the inputs with which the algorithm takes
the average running time (or memory).

1.13 Asymptotic Notation
Having the expressions for the best, average and worst cases, for all three cases we need to
identify the upper and lower bounds. To represent these upper and lower bounds, we need some
kind of syntax, and that is the subject of the following discussion. Let us assume that the given
algorithm is represented in the form of function f(n).

1.14 Big-O Notation
This notation gives the tight upper bound of the given function. Generally, it is represented as f(n)
= O(g(n)). That means, at larger values of n, the upper bound of f(n) is g(n).

For example, if f(n) = n4 + 100n2 + 10n + 50 is the given algorithm, then n4 is g(n). That means
g(n) gives the maximum rate of growth for f(n) at larger values of n.
Let us see the O–notation with a little more detail. O–notation defined as O(g(n)) = {f(n): there
exist positive constants c and n0 such that 0 ≤ f(n) ≤ cg(n) for all n ≥ n0}. g(n) is an asymptotic
tight upper bound for f(n). Our objective is to give the smallest rate of growth g(n) which is
greater than or equal to the given algorithms’ rate of growth f(n).
Generally we discard lower values of n. That means the rate of growth at lower values of n is not
important. In the figure, n0 is the point from which we need to consider the rate of growth for a
given algorithm. Below n0, the rate of growth could be different. n0 is called threshold for the
given function.

Big-O Visualization
O(g(n)) is the set of functions with smaller or the same order of growth as g(n). For example;
O(n2) includes O(1), O(n), O(nlogn), etc.
Note: Analyze the algorithms at larger values of n only. What this means is, below n0 we do not
care about the rate of growth.

Big-O Examples
Example-1 Find upper bound for f(n) = 3n + 8
Solution: 3n + 8 ≤ 4n, for all n ≥ 8
∴ 3n + 8 = O(n) with c = 4 and n0 = 8
Example-2 Find upper bound for f(n) = n2 + 1
Solution: n2 + 1 ≤ 2n2, for all n ≥ 1
∴ n2 + 1 = O(n2) with c = 2 and n0 = 1
Example-3 Find upper bound for f(n) = n4 + 100n2 + 50
Solution: n4 + 100n2 + 50 ≤ 2n4, for all n ≥ 11
∴ n4 + 100n2 + 50 = O(n4 ) with c = 2 and n0 = 11
Example-4 Find upper bound for f(n) = 2n3 – 2n2
Solution: 2n3 – 2n2 ≤ 2n3, for all n ≥ 1
∴ 2n3 – 2n2 = O(n3 ) with c = 2 and n0 = 1
Example-5 Find upper bound for f(n) = n
Solution: n ≤ n, for all n ≥ 1
∴ n = O(n) with c = 1 and n0 = 1
Example-6 Find upper bound for f(n) = 410
Solution: 410 ≤ 410, for all n ≥ 1
∴ 410 = O(1) with c = 1 and n0 = 1

No Uniqueness?
There is no unique set of values for n0 and c in proving the asymptotic bounds. Let us consider,
100n + 5 = O(n). For this function there are multiple n0 and c values possible.
Solution1: 100n + 5 ≤ 100n + n = 101n ≤ 101n, for all n ≥ 5, n0 = 5 and c = 101 is a solution.
Solution2: 100n + 5 ≤ 100n + 5n = 105n ≤ 105n, for all n ≥ 1, n0 = 1 and c = 105 is also a
solution.

1.15 Omega-Ω Notation
Similar to the O discussion, this notation gives the tighter lower bound of the given algorithm and
we represent it as f(n) = Ω(g(n)). That means, at larger values of n, the tighter lower bound of
f(n) is g(n). For example, if f(n) = 100n2 + 10n + 50, g(n) is Ω(n2).
The Ω notation can be defined as Ω(g(n)) = {f(n): there exist positive constants c and n0 such that
0 ≤ cg(n) ≤ f(n) for all n ≥ n0}. g(n) is an asymptotic tight lower bound for f(n). Our objective is
to give the largest rate of growth g(n) which is less than or equal to the given algorithm’s rate of
growth f(n).

Ω Examples
Example-1 Find lower bound for f(n) = 5n2.

Solution: ∃c, n0 Such that: 0 ≤ cn2≤ 5n2 ⇒ cn2≤ 5n2 ⇒ c = 5 and n0 = 1
∴ 5n2 = Ω(n2) with c = 5 and n0 = 1
Example-2 Prove f(n) = 100n + 5 ≠ Ω(n2).
Solution: ∃ c, n0 Such that: 0 ≤ cn2 ≤ 100n + 5
100n + 5 ≤ 100n + 5n (∀n ≥ 1) = 105n
cn2 ≤ 105n ⇒ n(cn – 105) ≤ 0
Since n is positive ⇒ cn – 105 ≤ 0 ⇒ n ≤ 105/c
⇒ Contradiction: n cannot be smaller than a constant
Example-3 2n = Ω(n), n3 = Ω(n3), logn = Ω(logn).

1.16 Theta-Θ Notation
This notation decides whether the upper and lower bounds of a given function (algorithm) are the
same. The average running time of an algorithm is always between the lower bound and the upper
bound. If the upper bound (O) and lower bound (Ω) give the same result, then the Θ notation will
also have the same rate of growth. As an example, let us assume that f(n) = 10n + n is the
expression. Then, its tight upper bound g(n) is O(n). The rate of growth in the best case is g(n) =
O(n).
In this case, the rates of growth in the best case and worst case are the same. As a result, the
average case will also be the same. For a given function (algorithm), if the rates of growth
(bounds) for O and Ω are not the same, then the rate of growth for the Θ case may not be the same.
In this case, we need to consider all possible time complexities and take the average of those (for
example, for a quick sort average case, refer to the Sorting chapter).
Now consider the definition of Θ notation. It is defined as Θ(g(n)) = {f(n): there exist positive
constants c1, c2 and n0 such that 0 ≤ c1g(n) ≤ f(n) ≤ c2g(n) for all n ≥ n0}. g(n) is an asymptotic
tight bound for f(n). Θ(g(n)) is the set of functions with the same order of growth as g(n).
In this case, the rates of growth in the best case and worst case are the same. As a result, the
average case will also be the same. For a given function (algorithm), if the rates of growth
(bounds) for O and Ω are not the same, then the rate of growth for the Θ case may not be the same.
In this case, we need to consider all possible time complexities and take the average of those (for
example, for a quick sort average case, refer to the Sorting chapter).

Now consider the definition of Θ notation. It is defined as Θ(g(n)) = {f(n): there exist positive
constants c1, c2 and n0 such that 0 ≤ c1g(n) ≤ f(n) ≤ c2g(n) for all n ≥ n0}. g(n) is an asymptotic
tight bound for f(n). Θ(g(n)) is the set of functions with the same order of growth as g(n).

Θ Examples
Example 1 Find Θ bound for
, for all, n ≥ 2

Solution:
∴

with c1 = 1/5, c2 = 1 and n0 = 2

Example 2 Prove n ≠ Θ(n2)
Solution: c1 n2 ≤ n ≤ c2n2 ⇒ only holds for: n ≤ 1/c1
∴ n ≠ Θ(n2)
Example 3 Prove 6n3 ≠ Θ(n2)
Solution: c1 n2≤ 6n3 ≤ c2 n2 ⇒ only holds for: n ≤ c2/6
∴ 6n3 ≠ Θ(n2)
Example 4 Prove n ≠ Θ (logn)

Solution:

Impossible

1.17 Important Notes
For analysis (best case, worst case and average), we try to give the upper bound (O) and lower
bound (Ω) and average running time (Θ). From the above examples, it should also be clear that,
for a given function (algorithm), getting the upper bound (O) and lower bound (Ω) and average
running time (Θ) may not always be possible. For example, if we are discussing the best case of
an algorithm, we try to give the upper bound (O) and lower bound (Ω) and average running time
(Θ).
In the remaining chapters, we generally focus on the upper bound (O) because knowing the lower
bound (Ω) of an algorithm is of no practical importance, and we use the Θ notation if the upper
bound (O) and lower bound (Ω) are the same.

1.18 Why is it called Asymptotic Analysis?
From the discussion above (for all three notations: worst case, best case, and average case), we
can easily understand that, in every case for a given function f(n) we are trying to find another
function g(n) which approximates f(n) at higher values of n. That means g(n) is also a curve
which approximates f(n) at higher values of n.
In mathematics we call such a curve an asymptotic curve. In other terms, g(n) is the asymptotic
curve for f(n). For this reason, we call algorithm analysis asymptotic analysis.

1.19 Guidelines for Asymptotic Analysis
There are some general rules to help us determine the running time of an algorithm.
1)

Loops: The running time of a loop is, at most, the running time of the statements inside the
loop (including tests) multiplied by the number of iterations.

Total time = a constant c × n = c n = O(n).
2)

Nested loops: Analyze from the inside out. Total running time is the product of the sizes of

all the loops.

Total time =c × n × n = cn2 = O(n2).
3)

Consecutive statements: Add the time complexities of each statement.

Total time = c0 + c1n + c2n2 = O(n2).
4)

If-then-else statements: Worst-case running time: the test, plus either the then part or the
else part (whichever is the larger).

Total time = c0 + c1 + (c2 + c3) * n = O(n).
5)

Logarithmic complexity: An algorithm is O(logn) if it takes a constant time to cut the
problem size by a fraction (usually by½). As an example let us consider the following
program:

If we observe carefully, the value of i is doubling every time. Initially i = 1, in next step i
= 2, and in subsequent steps i = 4, 8 and so on. Let us assume that the loop is executing
some k times. At kth step 2k = n, and at (k + 1)th step we come out of the loop. Taking
logarithm on both sides, gives

Total time = O(logn).
Note: Similarly, for the case below, the worst case rate of growth is O(logn). The same
discussion holds good for the decreasing sequence as well.

Another example: binary search (finding a word in a dictionary of n pages)
•
•
•

Look at the center point in the dictionary
Is the word towards the left or right of center?
Repeat the process with the left or right part of the dictionary until the word is found.

1.20 Simplyfying properties of asymptotic notations
•
•
•
•
•
•

Transitivity: f(n) = Θ(g(n)) and g(n) = Θ(h(n)) ⇒f(n) = Θ(h(n)). Valid for O and Ω
as well.
Reflexivity: f(n) = Θ(f(n)). Valid for O and Ω.
Symmetry: f(n) = Θ(g(n)) if and only if g(n) = Θ(f(n)).
Transpose symmetry: f(n) = O(g(n)) if and only if g(n) = Ω(f(n)).
If f(n) is in O(kg(n)) for any constant k > 0, then f(n) is in O(g(n)).
If f1(n) is in O((g1(n)) and f2(n) is in O(g2(n)), then (f1 + f2)(n) is in O(max(g1(n),
g1(n))).

•

If f1(n) is in O(g1(n)) and f2(n) is in O(g2(n)) then f1(n) f2(n) is in O(g1(n) g1(n)).

1.21 Commonly used Logarithms and Summations
Logarithms

Arithmetic series

Geometric series

Harmonic series

Other important formulae

1.22 Master Theorem for Divide and Conquer Recurrences
All divide and conquer algorithms (Also discussed in detail in the Divide and Conquer chapter)
divide the problem into sub-problems, each of which is part of the original problem, and then
perform some additional work to compute the final answer. As an example, a merge sort
algorithm [for details, refer to Sorting chapter] operates on two sub-problems, each of which is
half the size of the original, and then performs O(n) additional work for merging. This gives the
running time equation:

The following theorem can be used to determine the running time of divide and conquer
algorithms. For a given program (algorithm), first we try to find the recurrence relation for the
problem. If the recurrence is of the below form then we can directly give the answer without fully
solving it. If the recurrence is of the form
, where a ≥ 1, b > l,k
≥ 0 and p is a real number, then:
1)
2)

3)

If a > bk , then
If a = bk
a. If p > –1, then
b. If p = –1, then
c. If p < –1, then
If a < bk
a. If p ≥ 0, then
b. If p < 0, then T(n) = O(nk )

1.23 Divide and Conquer Master Theorem: Problems & Solutions
For each of the following recurrences, give an expression for the runtime T(n) if the recurrence
can be solved with the Master Theorem. Otherwise, indicate that the Master Theorem does not
apply.
Problem-1

T(n) = 3T (n/2) + n2

Solution: T(n) = 3T (n/2) + n2 ⇒ T (n) =Θ(n2) (Master Theorem Case 3.a)
Problem-2

T(n) = 4T (n/2) + n2

Solution: T(n) = 4T (n/2) + n2 ⇒ T (n) = Θ(n2logn) (Master Theorem Case 2.a)
Problem-3

T(n) = T(n/2) + n2

Solution: T(n) = T(n/2) + n2 ⇒ Θ(n2) (Master Theorem Case 3.a)

Problem-4

T(n) = 2nT(n/2) + nn

Solution: T(n) = 2nT(n/2) + nn ⇒ Does not apply (a is not constant)
Problem-5

T(n) = 16T(n/4) + n

Solution: T(n) = 16T (n/4) + n ⇒ T(n) = Θ(n2) (Master Theorem Case 1)
Problem-6

T(n) = 2T(n/2) + nlogn

Solution: T(n) = 2T(n/2) + nlogn ⇒ T(n) = Θ(nlog2n) (Master Theorem Case 2.a)
Problem-7

T(n) = 2T(n/2) + n/logn

Solution: T(n) = 2T(n/2) + n/logn ⇒ T(n) =Θ(nloglogn) (Master Theorem Case 2. b)
Problem-8

T(n) = 2T (n/4) + n0.51

Solution: T(n) = 2T(n/4) + n0.51 ⇒ T (n) = Θ(n0.51) (Master Theorem Case 3.b)
Problem-9

T(n) = 0.5T(n/2) + 1/n

Solution: T(n) = 0.5T(n/2) + 1/n ⇒ Does not apply (a < 1)
Problem-10

T (n) = 6T (n/3)+ n2 logn

Solution: T(n) = 6T(n/3) + n2logn ⇒ T(n) =Θ(n2logn) (Master Theorem Case 3.a)
Problem-11

T(n) = 64T(n/8) – n2logn

Solution: T(n) = 64T(n/8) – n2logn ⇒ Does not apply (function is not positive)
Problem-12

T (n) = 7T(n/3) + n2

Solution: T(n) = 7T(n/3) + n2 ⇒ T(n) = Θ(n2) (Master Theorem Case 3.as)
Problem-13

T (n) = 4T (n/2) + logn

Solution: T(n) = 4T (n/2) + logn ⇒ T(n) = Θ(n2) (Master Theorem Case 1)
Problem-14

T (n) = 16T (n/4) + n!

Solution: T(n) = 16T (n/4) + n! ⇒ T(n) = Θ(n!) (Master Theorem Case 3.a)
Problem-15
Solution: T(n) =
Problem-16

T (n) =

T (n/2) + logn

T (n/2) + logn ⇒ T(n) = Θ(

) (Master Theorem Case 1)

T (n) = 3T (n/2) + n

Solution: T(n) = 3T (n/2) + n ⇒ T(n) = Θ(nlog3) (Master Theorem Case 1)
Problem-17

T(n) = 3T (n/3) +

Solution: T(n) = 3T (n/3) +
Problem-18

⇒ T(n) = Θ(n) (Master Theorem Case 1)

T(n) = 4T (n/2) + cn

Solution: T(n) = 4T (n/2) + cn ⇒ T(n) = Θ(n2) (Master Theorem Case 1)
Problem-19

T(n) = 3T (n/4) + nlogn

Solution: T(n) = 3T (n/4) + nlogn ⇒ T(n) = Θ(nlogn) (Master Theorem Case 3.a)
Problem-20

T (n) = 3T (n/3) + n/2

Solution: T(n) = 3T (n/3) + n/2 ⇒ T (n) = Θ(nlogn) (Master Theorem Case 2.a)

1.24 Master Theorem for Subtract and Conquer Recurrences
Let T(n) be a function defined on positive n, and having the property

for some constants c, a > 0, b > 0, k ≥ 0, and function f(n). If f(n) is in O(nk ), then

1.25 Variant of Subtraction and Conquer Master Theorem
The solution to the equation T(n) = T(α n) + T((1 – α)n) + βn, where 0 < α < 1 and β > 0 are
constants, is O(nlogn).

1.26 Method of Guessing and Confirming
Now, let us discuss a method which can be used to solve any recurrence. The basic idea behind
this method is:

In other words, it addresses the question: What if the given recurrence doesn’t seem to match with
any of these (master theorem) methods? If we guess a solution and then try to verify our guess

inductively, usually either the proof will succeed (in which case we are done), or the proof will
fail (in which case the failure will help us refine our guess).
As an example, consider the recurrence T(n) =
T( ) + n. This doesn’t fit into the form
required by the Master Theorems. Carefully observing the recurrence gives us the impression that
it is similar to the divide and conquer method (dividing the problem into
subproblems each
with size
). As we can see, the size of the subproblems at the first level of recursion is n. So,
let us guess that T(n) = O(nlogn), and then try to prove that our guess is correct.
Let’s start by trying to prove an upper bound T(n) ≤ cnlogn:

The last inequality assumes only that
. This is correct if n is sufficiently large and
for any constant c, no matter how small. From the above proof, we can see that our guess is
correct for the upper bound. Now, let us prove the lower bound for this recurrence.

The last inequality assumes only that
. This is incorrect if n is sufficiently large
and for any constant k. From the above proof, we can see that our guess is incorrect for the lower
bound.
From the above discussion, we understood that Θ(nlogn) is too big. How about Θ(n)? The lower
bound is easy to prove directly:

Now, let us prove the upper bound for this Θ(n).

From the above induction, we understood that Θ(n) is too small and Θ(nlogn) is too big. So, we
need something bigger than n and smaller than nlogn. How about
Proving the upper bound for

:

Proving the lower bound for

:

The last step doesn’t work. So,
doesn’t work. What else is between n and nlogn?
How about nloglogn? Proving upper bound for nloglogn:

Proving lower bound for nloglogn:

From the above proofs, we can see that T(n) ≤ cnloglogn, if c ≥ 1 and T(n) ≥ knloglogn, if k ≤ 1.
Technically, we’re still missing the base cases in both proofs, but we can be fairly confident at
this point that T(n) = Θ(nloglogn).

1.27 Amortized Analysis
Amortized analysis refers to determining the time-averaged running time for a sequence of
operations. It is different from average case analysis, because amortized analysis does not make
any assumption about the distribution of the data values, whereas average case analysis assumes
the data are not “bad” (e.g., some sorting algorithms do well on average over all input orderings
but very badly on certain input orderings). That is, amortized analysis is a worst-case analysis,
but for a sequence of operations rather than for individual operations.
The motivation for amortized analysis is to better understand the running time of certain
techniques, where standard worst case analysis provides an overly pessimistic bound. Amortized
analysis generally applies to a method that consists of a sequence of operations, where the vast
majority of the operations are cheap, but some of the operations are expensive. If we can show
that the expensive operations are particularly rare we can change them to the cheap operations,
and only bound the cheap operations.
The general approach is to assign an artificial cost to each operation in the sequence, such that the
total of the artificial costs for the sequence of operations bounds the total of the real costs for the
sequence. This artificial cost is called the amortized cost of an operation. To analyze the running
time, the amortized cost thus is a correct way of understanding the overall running time – but note
that particular operations can still take longer so it is not a way of bounding the running time of
any individual operation in the sequence.
When one event in a sequence affects the cost of later events:
•
•

One particular task may be expensive.
But it may leave data structure in a state that the next few operations becomes easier.

Example: Let us consider an array of elements from which we want to find the kth smallest
element. We can solve this problem using sorting. After sorting the given array, we just need to
return the kth element from it. The cost of performing the sort (assuming comparison based sorting
algorithm) is O(nlogn). If we perform n such selections then the average cost of each selection is
O(nlogn/n) = O(logn). This clearly indicates that sorting once is reducing the complexity of
subsequent operations.

1.28 Algorithms Analysis: Problems & Solutions
Note: From the following problems, try to understand the cases which have different

complexities (O(n),O(logn),O(loglogn) etc.).
Problem-21

Find the complexity of the below recurrence:

Solution: Let us try solving this function with substitution.

This clearly shows that the complexity of this function is O(3n).
Note: We can use the Subtraction and Conquer master theorem for this problem.
Problem-22

Find the complexity of the below recurrence:

Solution: Let us try solving this function with substitution.

∴ Complexity is O(1). Note that while the recurrence relation looks exponential, the solution to
the recurrence relation here gives a different result.

Problem-23

What is the running time of the following function?

Solution: Consider the comments in the below function:

We can define the ‘s’ terms according to the relation si = si-1 + i. The value of ‘i’ increases by 1
for each iteration. The value contained in ‘s’ at the ith iteration is the sum of the first ‘i’ positive
integers. If k is the total number of iterations taken by the program, then the while loop terminates
if:

Problem-24

Solution:

Find the complexity of the function given below.

In the above-mentioned function the loop will end, if i2 > n ⇒ T(n) = O(
smae as that of Problem-23.
Problem-25

What is the complexity of the program given below?

Solution: Consider the comments in the following function.

The complexity of the above function is O(n2logn).
Problem-26

What is the complexity of the program given below?

). The reasoning is

Solution: Consider the comments in the following function.

The complexity of the above function is O(nlog2n).
Problem-27

Find the complexity of the program given below.

Solution: Consider the comments in the following function.

The complexity of the above function is O(n). Even though the inner loop is bounded by n, but due
to the break statement it is executing only once.
Problem-28
Write a recursive function for the running time T(n) of the function given below.
Prove using the iterative method that T(n) = Θ(n3).

Solution: Consider the comments in the function below:

The recurrence for this code is clearly T(n) = T(n – 3) + cn2 for some constant c > 0 since each
call prints out n2 asterisks and calls itself recursively on n – 3. Using the iterative method we get:
T(n) = T(n – 3) + cn2. Using the Subtraction and Conquer master theorem, we get T(n) = Θ(n3).
Problem-29

Determine Θ bounds for the recurrence relation:

Solution: Using Divide and Conquer master theorem, we get: O(nlog2n).
Problem-30

Determine Θ bounds for the recurrence:

Solution: Substituting in the recurrence equation, we get:

Problem-31

Determine Θ bounds for the recurrence relation: T(n) = T(⌈ n/2 ⌉) + 7.

Solution: Using Master Theorem we get: Θ(logn).
Problem-32

Prove that the running time of the code below is Ω(logn).

Solution: The while loop will terminate once the value of ‘k’ is greater than or equal to the value
of ‘n’. In each iteration the value of ‘k’ is multiplied by 3. If i is the number of iterations, then ‘k’
has the value of 3i after i iterations. The loop is terminated upon reaching i iterations when 3i ≥ n
↔ i ≥ log3 n, which shows that i = Ω (logn).
Problem-33

Solve the following recurrence.

Solution: By iteration:

Note: We can use the Subtraction and Conquer master theorem for this problem.
Problem-34

Consider the following program:

Solution: The recurrence relation for the running time of this program is:

Note T(n) has two recurrence calls indicating a binary tree. Each step recursively calls the
program for n reduced by 1 and 2, so the depth of the recurrence tree is O(n). The number of
leaves at depth n is 2n since this is a full binary tree, and each leaf takes at least O(1)
computations for the constant factor. Running time is clearly exponential in n and it is O(2n).
Problem-35

Running time of following program?

Solution: Consider the comments in the function below:

In the above program, the inner loop executes n/i times for each value of i. Its running time is
Problem-36

What is the complexity of

Solution: Using the logarithmic property, logxy = logx + logy, we can see that this problem is
equivalent to

This shows that the time complexity = O(nlogn).
Problem-37
What is the running time of the following recursive function (specified as a
function of the input value n)? First write the recurrence formula and then find its
complexity.

Solution: Consider the comments in the function below:

We can assume that for asymptotical analysis k = ⌈k⌉ for every integer k ≥ 1. The recurrence for
this code is
Using master theorem, we get T(n) = Θ(n).
Problem-38
What is the running time of the following recursive function (specified as a
function of the input value n)? First write a recurrence formula, and show its solution using
induction.

Solution: Consider the comments in the below function:

The if statement requires constant time [O(1)]. With the for loop, we neglect the loop overhead
and only count three times that the function is called recursively. This implies a time complexity
recurrence:

Using the Subtraction and Conquer master theorem, we get T(n) = Θ(3n).
Problem-39
Write a recursion formula for the running time T(n) of the function f whose code
is given below. What is the running time of function, as a function of n?

Solution: Consider the comments in the below function:

The

recurrence

for

this

piece

of
code
is
Applying master theorem,

we get T(n) = O(n).
Problem-40

Find the complexity of the recurrence: T(n) = 2T(

) + logn

Solution: The given recurrence is not in the master theorem format. Let us try to convert this to the
master theorem format by assuming n = 2m. Applying the logarithm on both sides gives, logn =
mlog2 ⇒ m = logn. Now, the given function becomes:

To

make

it

simple

we
assume
Applying the master theorem

format would result in S(m) = O(mlogrn). If we substitute m = logn back, T(n) = S(logn) =
O((logn) loglogn).
Problem-41

Find the complexity of the recurrence: T(n) = T(

)+1

Solution: Applying the logic of Problem-40 gives

Applying the master

theorem would result in S(m) = O(logm). Substituting m = logn, gives T(n) = S(logn) =
O(loglogn).
Problem-42

Find the complexity of the recurrence: T(n) = 2T(

Solution: Applying the logic of Problem-40 gives:
theorem results
Problem-43

)+1
Using the master

Substituting m = logn gives T(n) =O(logn).
Find the complexity of the function given below.

Solution: Consider the comments in the below function:

For the above function, recurrence function can be given as: T(n) = T(
that of Problem-41.
Problem-44
of n.

) + 1. This is same as

Analyze the running time of the following recursive pseuedocode as a function

Solution: Consider the comments in below pseuedocode and call running time of function(n) as
T(n).

T(n) can be defined as follows:

Using the master theorem gives:
Problem-45

Find the complexity of the pseudocode given below:

Solution: Consider the comments in the pseudocode given below:

The recurrence for this function is T(n) = T(n/2) + n. Using master theorem we get: T(n) = O(n).

Problem-46

Running time of the following program?

Solution: Consider the comments in the function given below:

Complexity of above program is O(nlogn).
Problem-47

Running time of the following program?

Solution: Consider the comments in the function given below:

The time complexity of this program is: O(n2).
Problem-48

Find the complexity of the below function:

Solution: Consider the comments in the function given below:

The recurrence for this function is:
O(n).
Problem-49

Solution:

Find the complexity of the below function:

Using master theorem, we get T(n) =

Time Complexity: O(logn * logn) = O(log2n).
Problem-50
Σ1≤k≤nO(n), where O(n) stands for order n is:
(a) O(n)
(b) O(n2)
(c) O(n3)
(d) O(3n2)
(e) O(1.5n2)
Solution: (b). Σ1≤k≤nO(n) = O(n) Σ1≤k≤n1 = O(n2).
Problem-51
Which of the following three claims are correct
I (n + k)m = Θ(nm), where k and m are constants II 2n+1 = O(2n)
(a) I and II
(b) I and III
(c) II and III
(d) I, II and III

III 22n+1 = O(2n)

Solution: (a). (I) (n + k)m = nk + c1*nk –1 + ... km = Θ(nk ) and (II) 2n+1 = 2*2n = O(2n)
Problem-52

Consider the following functions: f(n) = 2n g(n) = n! h(n) = nlogn

Which of the following statements about the asymptotic behavior of f(n), g(n), and h(n) is
true?
(A) f(n) = O(g(n)); g(n) = O(h(n))
(B) f(n) = Ω (g(n)); g(n) = O(h(n))
(C) g(n) = O(f(n)); h(n) = O(f(n))
(D) h(n) = O(f(n)); g(n) = Ω (f(n))
Solution: (D). According to the rate of growth: h(n) < f(n) < g(n) (g(n) is asymptotically greater
than f(n), and f(n) is asymptotically greater than h(n)). We can easily see the above order by
taking logarithms of the given 3 functions: lognlogn < n < log(n!). Note that, log(n!) = O(nlogn).
Problem-53

Consider the following segment of C-code:

The number of comparisons made in the execution of the loop for any n > 0 is:
(A)
(B) n
(C)
(D)
Solution: (a). Let us assume that the loop executes k times. After kth step the value of j is 2k .
Taking logarithms on both sides gives
Since we are doing one more comparison for
exiting from the loop, the answer is
.
Problem-54
Consider the following C code segment. Let T(n) denote the number of times the
for loop is executed by the program on input n. Which of the following is true?

(A) T(n) = O( ) and T(n) = Ω( )
(B) T(n) = O( ) and T(n) = Ω(1)
(C) T(n) = O(n) and T(n) = Ω( )
(D) None of the above
Solution: (B). Big O notation describes the tight upper bound and Big Omega notation describes
the tight lower bound for an algorithm. The for loop in the question is run maximum
times and
minimum 1 time. Therefore, T(n) = O( ) and T(n) = Ω(1).
Problem-55
In the following C function, let n ≥ m. How many recursive calls are made by
this function?

(A)
(B) Ω(n)

(C)
(D)

Θ(n)

Solution: No option is correct. Big O notation describes the tight upper bound and Big Omega
notation describes the tight lower bound for an algorithm. For m = 2 and for all n = 2i, the
running time is O(1) which contradicts every option.
Problem-56
Suppose T(n) = 2T(n/2) + n, T(0)=T(1)=1. Which one of the following is
FALSE?
(A) T(n) = O(n2)
(B) T(n) = Θ(nlogn)
(C) T(n) = Ω(n2)
(D) T(n) = O(nlogn)
Solution: (C). Big O notation describes the tight upper bound and Big Omega notation describes
the tight lower bound for an algorithm. Based on master theorem, we get T(n) = Θ(nlogn). This
indicates that tight lower bound and tight upper bound are the same. That means, O(nlogn) and Ω
(nlogn) are correct for given recurrence. So option (C) is wrong.
Problem-57

Find the complexity of the below function:

Solution:

Time Complexity: O(n5).
Problem-58

To calculate 9n, give an algorithm and discuss its complexity.

Solution: Start with 1 and multiply by 9 until reaching 9n.
Time Complexity: There are n – 1 multiplications and each takes constant time giving a Θ(n)
algorithm.
Problem-59

For Problem-58, can we improve the time complexity?

Solution: Refer to the Divide and Conquer chapter.
Problem-60

Find the complexity of the below function:

Solution: Consider the worst-case.

Time Complexity: O(n2).
Problem-61

Solve the following recurrence relation using the recursion tree method:

Solution: How much work do we do in each level of the recursion tree?

In level 0, we take n2 time. At level 1, the two subproblems take time:

At level 2 the four subproblems are of size
subproblems take time:

Similarly the amount of work at level k is at most
Let

the total runtime is then:

and

respectively. These two

That is, the first level provides a constant fraction of the total runtime.
Problem-62

Find the time complexity of recurrence

Solution: Let us solve this problem by method of guessing. The total size on each level of the
recurrance tree is less than n, so we guess that f(n) = n will dominate. Assume for all i < n that
c1n ≤ T(i) ≤ c2n. Then,

If c1 ≥ 8k and c2 ≤ 8k, then c1n = T(n) = c2n. So, T(n) = Θ(n). In general, if you have multiple
recursive calls, the sum of the arguments to those calls is less than n (in this case
), and f(n) is reasonably large, a good guess is T(n) = Θ(f(n)).
Problem-63

Solution:

Rank

the

following

functions

by

order

of

growth:

Problem-64

Can we say

Solution: Yes: because
Problem-65

Can we say 23n = O(2n)?

Solution: No: because 23n = (23)n = 8n not less than 2n.

2.1 Introduction
In this chapter, we will look at one of the important topics, “recursion”, which will be used in
almost every chapter, and also its relative “backtracking”.

2.2 What is Recursion?
Any function which calls itself is called recursive. A recursive method solves a problem by
calling a copy of itself to work on a smaller problem. This is called the recursion step. The
recursion step can result in many more such recursive calls. It is important to ensure that the
recursion terminates. Each time the function calls itself with a slightly simpler version of the
original problem. The sequence of smaller problems must eventually converge on the base case.

2.3 Why Recursion?
Recursion is a useful technique borrowed from mathematics. Recursive code is generally shorter
and easier to write than iterative code. Generally, loops are turned into recursive functions when
they are compiled or interpreted. Recursion is most useful for tasks that can be defined in terms of
similar subtasks. For example, sort, search, and traversal problems often have simple recursive
solutions.

2.4 Format of a Recursive Function
A recursive function performs a task in part by calling itself to perform the subtasks. At some
point, the function encounters a subtask that it can perform without calling itself. This case, where
the function does not recur, is called the base case. The former, where the function calls itself to
perform a subtask, is referred to as the cursive case. We can write all recursive functions using
the format:

As an example consider the factorial function: n! is the product of all integers between n and 1.
The definition of recursive factorial looks like:

This definition can easily be converted to recursive implementation. Here the problem is
determining the value of n!, and the subproblem is determining the value of (n – l)!. In the
recursive case, when n is greater than 1, the function calls itself to determine the value of (n –l)!
and multiplies that with n. In the base case, when n is 0 or 1, the function simply returns 1. This
looks like the following:

2.5 Recursion and Memory (Visualization)
Each recursive call makes a new copy of that method (actually only the variables) in memory.
Once a method ends (that is, returns some data), the copy of that returning method is removed
from memory. The recursive solutions look simple but visualization and tracing takes time. For
better understanding, let us consider the following example.

For this example, if we call the print function with n=4, visually our memory assignments may
look like:

Now, let us consider our factorial function. The visualization of factorial function with n=4 will
look like:

2.6 Recursion versus Iteration
While discussing recursion, the basic question that comes to mind is: which way is better? –
iteration or recursion? The answer to this question depends on what we are trying to do. A
recursive approach mirrors the problem that we are trying to solve. A recursive approach makes
it simpler to solve a problem that may not have the most obvious of answers. But, recursion adds
overhead for each recursive call (needs space on the stack frame).

Recursion

•
•
•
•

Terminates when a base case is reached.
Each recursive call requires extra space on the stack frame (memory).
If we get infinite recursion, the program may run out of memory and result in stack
overflow.
Solutions to some problems are easier to formulate recursively.

Iteration
•
•
•
•

Terminates when a condition is proven to be false.
Each iteration does not require any extra space.
An infinite loop could loop forever since there is no extra memory being created.
Iterative solutions to a problem may not always be as obvious as a recursive
solution.

2.7 Notes on Recursion
•
•
•
•

•
•

Recursive algorithms have two types of cases, recursive cases and base cases.
Every recursive function case must terminate at a base case.
Generally, iterative solutions are more efficient than recursive solutions [due to the
overhead of function calls].
A recursive algorithm can be implemented without recursive function calls using a
stack, but it’s usually more trouble than its worth. That means any problem that can
be solved recursively can also be solved iteratively.
For some problems, there are no obvious iterative algorithms.
Some problems are best suited for recursive solutions while others are not.

2.8 Example Algorithms of Recursion
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

Fibonacci Series, Factorial Finding
Merge Sort, Quick Sort
Binary Search
Tree Traversals and many Tree Problems: InOrder, PreOrder PostOrder
Graph Traversals: DFS [Depth First Search] and BFS [Breadth First Search]
Dynamic Programming Examples
Divide and Conquer Algorithms
Towers of Hanoi
Backtracking Algorithms [we will discuss in next section]

2.9 Recursion: Problems & Solutions

In this chapter we cover a few problems with recursion and we will discuss the rest in other
chapters. By the time you complete reading the entire book, you will encounter many recursion
problems.
Problem-1

Discuss Towers of Hanoi puzzle.

Solution: The Towers of Hanoi is a mathematical puzzle. It consists of three rods (or pegs or
towers) and a number of disks of different sizes which can slide onto any rod. The puzzle starts
with the disks on one rod in ascending order of size, the smallest at the top, thus making a conical
shape. The objective of the puzzle is to move the entire stack to another rod, satisfying the
following rules:
•
•
•
Algorithm
•
•
•
•

Problem-2
Solution:

Only one disk may be moved at a time.
Each move consists of taking the upper disk from one of the rods and sliding it onto
another rod, on top of the other disks that may already be present on that rod.
No disk may be placed on top of a smaller disk.

Move the top n – 1 disks from Source to Auxiliary tower,
Move the nth disk from Source to Destination tower,
Move the n – 1 disks from Auxiliary tower to Destination tower.
Transferring the top n – 1 disks from Source to Auxiliary tower can again be thought
of as a fresh problem and can be solved in the same manner. Once we solve Towers
of Hanoi with three disks, we can solve it with any number of disks with the above
algorithm.

Given an array, check whether the array is in sorted order with recursion.

Time Complexity: O(n). Space Complexity: O(n) for recursive stack space.

2.10 What is Backtracking?
Backtracking is an improvement of the brute force approach. It systematically searches for a
solution to a problem among all available options. In backtracking, we start with one possible
option out of many available options and try to solve the problem if we are able to solve the
problem with the selected move then we will print the solution else we will backtrack and select
some other option and try to solve it. If none if the options work out we will claim that there is no
solution for the problem.
Backtracking is a form of recursion. The usual scenario is that you are faced with a number of
options, and you must choose one of these. After you make your choice you will get a new set of
options; just what set of options you get depends on what choice you made. This procedure is
repeated over and over until you reach a final state. If you made a good sequence of choices, your
final state is a goal state; if you didn’t, it isn’t. Backtracking can be thought of as a selective
tree/graph traversal method. The tree is a way of representing some initial starting position (the
root node) and a final goal state (one of the leaves). Backtracking allows us to deal with
situations in which a raw brute-force approach would explode into an impossible number of
options to consider. Backtracking is a sort of refined brute force. At each node, we eliminate
choices that are obviously not possible and proceed to recursively check only those that have
potential.
What’s interesting about backtracking is that we back up only as far as needed to reach a previous
decision point with an as-yet-unexplored alternative. In general, that will be at the most recent
decision point. Eventually, more and more of these decision points will have been fully explored,
and we will have to backtrack further and further. If we backtrack all the way to our initial state
and have explored all alternatives from there, we can conclude the particular problem is
unsolvable. In such a case, we will have done all the work of the exhaustive recursion and known
that there is no viable solution possible.
•
•
•

•

Sometimes the best algorithm for a problem is to try all possibilities.
This is always slow, but there are standard tools that can be used to help.
Tools: algorithms for generating basic objects, such as binary strings [2n
possibilities for n-bit string], permutations [n!], combinations [n!/r! (n – r)!],
general strings [k –ary strings of length n has kn possibilities], etc...
Backtracking speeds the exhaustive search by pruning.

2.11 Example Algorithms of Backtracking
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

Binary Strings: generating all binary strings
Generating k – ary Strings
The Knapsack Problem
N-Queens Problem
Generalized Strings
Hamiltonian Cycles [refer to Graphs chapter]
Graph Coloring Problem

2.12 Backtracking: Problems & Solutions
Problem-3

Generate all the strings of n bits. Assume A[0..n – 1] is an array of size n.

Solution:

Let T(n) be the running time of binary(n). Assume function System.out.println takes time O(1).

Using Subtraction and Conquer Master theorem we get: T(n) = O(2n). This means the algorithm
for generating bit-strings is optimal.
Problem-4

Generate all the strings of length n drawn from 0... k – 1.

Solution: Let us assume we keep current k-ary string in an array A[0.. n – 1]. Call function kstring(n, k):

Let T(n) be the running time of k – string(n). Then,

Using Subtraction and Conquer Master theorem we get: T(n) = O(kn).
Note: For more problems, refer to String Algorithms chapter.
Problem-5

Solve the recurrence T(n) = 2T(n – 1) + 2n.

Solution: At each level of the recurrence tree, the number of problems is double from the
previous level, while the amount of work being done in each problem is half from the previous
level. Formally, the ith level has 2i problems, each requiring 2n-i work. Thus the ith level requires
exactly 2n work. The depth of this tree is n, because at the ith level, the originating call will be
T(n – i). Thus the total complexity for T(n) is T(n2n).

3.1 What is a Linked List?
A linked list is a data structure used for storing collections of data. A linked list has the following
properties.
•
•
•
•
•

Successive elements are connected by pointers
The last element points to NULL
Can grow or shrink in size during execution of a program
Can be made just as long as required (until systems memory exhausts)
Does not waste memory space (but takes some extra memory for pointers). It
allocates memory as list grows.

3.2 Linked Lists ADT
The following operations make linked lists an ADT:
Main Linked Lists Operations
•
•

Insert: inserts an element into the list
Delete: removes and returns the specified position element from the list

Auxiliary Linked Lists Operations
•
•
•

Delete List: removes all elements of the list (disposees the list)
Count: returns the number of elements in the list
Find nth node from the end of the list

3.3 Why Linked Lists?
There are many other data structures that do the same thing as linked lists. Before discussing
linked lists it is important to understand the difference between linked lists and arrays. Both
linked lists and arrays are used to store collections of data, and since both are used for the same
purpose, we need to differentiate their usage. That means in which cases arrays are suitable and
in which cases linked lists are suitable.

3.4 Arrays Overview
One memory block is allocated for the entire array to hold the elements of the array. The array
elements can be accessed in constant time by using the index of the particular element as the
subscript.

Why Constant Time for Accessing Array Elements?
To access an array element, the address of an element is computed as an offset from the base
address of the array and one multiplication is needed to compute what is supposed to be added to
the base address to get the memory address of the element. First the size of an element of that data
type is calculated and then it is multiplied with the index of the element to get the value to be
added to the base address.
This process takes one multiplication and one addition. Since these two operations take constant
time, we can say the array access can be performed in constant time.

Advantages of Arrays
•
•

Simple and easy to use
Faster access to the elements (constant access)

Disadvantages of Arrays
•
•
•
•

Preallocates all needed memory up front and wastes memory space for indices in the
array that are empty.
Fixed size: The size of the array is static (specify the array size before using it).
One block allocation: To allocate the array itself at the beginning, sometimes it may
not be possible to get the memory for the complete array (if the array size is big).
Complex position-based insertion: To insert an element at a given position, we may
need to shift the existing elements. This will create a position for us to insert the
new element at the desired position. If the position at which we want to add an
element is at the beginning, then the shifting operation is more expensive.

Dynamic Arrays
Dynamic array (also called growable array, resizable array, dynamic table, or array list) is a
random access, variable-size list data structure that allows elements to be added or removed.
One simple way of implementing dynamic arrays is to initially start with some fixed size array.
As soon as that array becomes full, create the new array double the size of the original array.
Similarly, reduce the array size to half if the elements in the array are less than half the size.
Note: We will see the implementation for dynamic arrays in the Stacks, Queues and Hashing
chapters.

Advantages of Linked Lists
Linked lists have both advantages and disadvantages. The advantage of linked lists is that they can
be expanded in constant time. To create an array, we must allocate memory for a certain number
of elements. To add more elements to the array when full, we must create a new array and copy
the old array into the new array. This can take a lot of time.
We can prevent this by allocating lots of space initially but then we might allocate more than we
need and waste memory. With a linked list, we can start with space for just one allocated element
and add on new elements easily without the need to do any copying and reallocating.

Issues with Linked Lists (Disadvantages)
There are a number of issues with linked lists. The main disadvantage of linked lists is access
time to individual elements. Array is random-access, which means it takes O(1) to access any
element in the array. Linked lists take O(n) for access to an element in the list in the worst case.
Another advantage of arrays in access time is spacial locality in memory. Arrays are defined as
contiguous blocks of memory, and so any array element will be physically near its neighbors. This
greatly benefits from modern CPU caching methods.
Although the dynamic allocation of storage is a great advantage, the overhead with storing and
retrieving data can make a big difference. Sometimes linked lists are hard to manipulate. If the
last item is deleted, the last but one must then have its pointer changed to hold a NULL reference.
This requires that the list is traversed to find the last but one link, and its pointer set to a NULL
reference.
Finally, linked lists waste memory in terms of extra reference points.

3.5 Comparison of Linked Lists with Arrays & Dynamic Arrays

3.6 Singly Linked Lists
Generally “linked list” means a singly linked list. This list consists of a number of nodes in which
each node has a next pointer to the following element. The link of the last node in the list is
NULL, which indicates the end of the list.

Following is a type declaration for a linked list:

Basic Operations on a List
•
•
•

Traversing the list
Inserting an item in the list
Deleting an item from the list

Traversing the Linked List
Let us assume that the head points to the first node of the list. To traverse the list we do the
following.
•
•
•

Follow the pointers.
Display the contents of the nodes (or count) as they are traversed.
Stop when the next pointer points to NULL.

The ListLength() function takes a linked list as input and counts the number of nodes in the list.
The function given below can be used for printing the list data with extra print function.

Time Complexity: O(n), for scanning the list of size n. Space Complexity: O(1), for creating a
temporary variable.

Singly Linked List Insertion
Insertion into a singly-linked list has three cases:
•
•
•

Inserting a new node before the head (at the beginning)
Inserting a new node after the tail (at the end of the list)
Inserting a new node at the middle of the list (random location)

Note: To insert an element in the linked list at some position p, assume that after inserting the
element the position of this new node is p.

Inserting a Node in Singly Linked List at the Beginning
In this case, a new node is inserted before the current head node. Only one next pointer needs to
be modified (new node’s next pointer) and it can be done in two steps:
•

Update the next pointer of new node, to point to the current head.

•

Update head pointer to point to the new node.

Inserting a Node in Singly Linked List at the Ending
In this case, we need to modify two next pointers (last nodes next pointer and new nodes next
pointer).
•

New nodes next pointer points to NULL.

•

Last nodes next pointer points to the new node.

Inserting a Node in Singly Linked List at the Middle
Let us assume that we are given a position where we want to insert the new node. In this case
also, we need to modify two next pointers.
•

If we want to add an element at position 3 then we stop at position 2. That means we
traverse 2 nodes and insert the new node. For simplicity let us assume that the
second node is called position node. The new node points to the next node of the
position where we want to add this node.

•

Position node’s next pointer now points to the new node.

Note: We can implement the three variations of the insert operation separately.
Time Complexity: O(n), since, in the worst case, we may need to insert the node at the end of the
list.
Space Complexity: O(1), for creating one temporary variable.

Singly Linked List Deletion

Similar to insertion, here we also have three cases.
•
•
•

Deleting the first node
Deleting the last node
Deleting an intermediate node.

Deleting the First Node in Singly Linked List
First node (current head node) is removed from the list. It can be done in two steps:
•

Create a temporary node which will point to the same node as that of head.

•

Now, move the head nodes pointer to the next node and dispose of the temporary
node.

Deleting the Last node in Singly Linked List
In this case, the last node is removed from the list. This operation is a bit trickier than removing
the first node, because the algorithm should find a node, which is previous to the tail. It can be
done in three steps:
•

Traverse the list and while traversing maintain the previous node address also. By
the time we reach the end of the list, we will have two pointers, one pointing to the
tail node and the other pointing to the node before the tail node.

•

Update previous node’s next pointer with NULL.

•

Dispose of the tail node.

Deleting an Intermediate Node in Singly Linked List
In this case, the node to be removed is always located between two nodes. Head and tail links
are not updated in this case. Such a removal can be done in two steps:
•

Similar to the previous case, maintain the previous node while traversing the list.
Once we find the node to be deleted, change the previous node’s next pointer to the
next pointer of the node to be deleted.

•

Dispose of the current node to be deleted.

Time Complexity: O(n). In the worst case, we may need to delete the node at the end of the list.
Space Complexity: O(1). Since, we are creating only one temporary variable.

Deleting Singly Linked List
This works by storing the current node in some temporary variable and freeing the current node.
After freeing the current node, go to the next node with a temporary variable and repeat this
process for all nodes.
Time Complexity: O(n), for scanning the complete list of size n. Space Complexity: O(1), for
temporary variable.

Implementation

3.7 Doubly Linked Lists
The advantage of a doubly linked list (also called two – way linked list) is that given a node in
the list, we can navigate in both directions. A node in a singly linked list cannot be removed
unless we have the pointer to its predecessor. But in a doubly linked list, we can delete a node
even if we don’t have the previous node’s address (since each node has a left pointer pointing to
the previous node and can move backward).
The primary disadvantages of doubly linked lists are:

•
•

Each node requires an extra pointer, requiring more space.
The insertion or deletion of a node takes a bit longer (more pointer operations).

Similar to a singly linked list, let us implement the operations of a doubly linked list. If you
understand the singly linked list operations, then doubly linked list operations are obvious.
Following is a type declaration for a doubly linked list:

Doubly Linked List Insertion
Insertion into a doubly-linked list has three cases (same as a singly linked list).

•
•
•

Inserting a new node before the head.
Inserting a new node after the tail (at the end of the list).
Inserting a new node at the middle of the list.

Inserting a Node in Doubly Linked List at the Beginning
In this case, new node is inserted before the head node. Previous and next pointers need to be
modified and it can be done in two steps:
•

Update the right pointer of the new node to point to the current head node (dotted link
in below figure) and also make left pointer of new node as NULL.

•

Update head node’s left pointer to point to the new node and make new node as head.

Inserting a Node in Doubly Linked List at the Ending
In this case, traverse the list till the end and insert the new node.
•

New node’s right pointer points to NULL and left pointer points to the end of the list.

•

Update right pointer of last node to point to new node.

Inserting a Node in Doubly Linked List in the Middle
As discussed in singly linked lists, traverse the list to the position node and insert the new node.
•

New node right pointer points to the next node of the position node where we want
to insert the new node. Also, new node left pointer points to the position node.

•

Position node right pointer points to the new node and the next node of position node
left pointer points to new node.

Time Complexity: O(n). In the worst case, we may need to insert the node at the end of the list.
Space Complexity: O(1), for creating one temporary variable.

Doubly Linked List Deletion
Similar to singly linked list deletion, here we have three cases:
•
•
•

Deleting the first node
Deleting the last node
Deleting an intermediate node

Deleting the First Node in Doubly Linked List
In this case, the first node (current head node) is removed from the list. It can be done in two
steps:
•
Create a temporary node which will point to the same node as that of head.

•

Now, move the head nodes pointer to the next node and change the heads left pointer
to NULL and dispose of the temporary node.

Deleting the Last Node in Doubly Linked List
This operation is a bit trickier than removing the first node, because the algorithm should find a
node, which is previous to the tail first. This can be done in three steps:
•

Traverse the list and while traversing maintain the previous node address also. By
the time we reach the end of the list, we will have two pointers, one pointing to the
tail and the other pointing to the node before the tail.

•

Update the next pointer of previous node to the tail node with NULL.

•

Dispose of the tail node.

Deleting an Intermediate Node in Doubly Linked List
In this case, the node to be removed is always located between two nodes, and the head and tail
links are not updated. The removal can be done in two steps:
•

Similar to the previous case, maintain the previous node while also traversing the
list. Upon locating the node to be deleted, change the previous node’s next pointer
to the next node of the node to be deleted.

•

Dispose of the current node to be deleted.

Time Complexity: O(n), for scanning the complete list of size n.
Space Complexity: O(1), for creating one temporary variable.

Implementation

3.8 Circular Linked Lists
In singly linked lists and doubly linked lists, the end of lists are indicated with NULL value. But
circular linked lists do not have ends. While traversing the circular linked lists we should be
careful; otherwise we will be traversing the list infinitely. In circular linked lists, each node has a
successor. Note that unlike singly linked lists, there is no node with NULL pointer in a circularly
linked list. In some situations, circular linked lists are useful.
For example, when several processes are using the same computer resource (CPU) for the same
amount of time, we have to assure that no process accesses the resource before all other
processes do (round robin algorithm). In a circular linked list, we access the elements using the
head node (similar to head node in singly linked list and doubly linked lists). For readability let
us assume that the class name of circular linked list is CLLNode.

Counting nodes in a Circular Linked List
The circular list is accessible through the node marked head. (also called tail). To count the
nodes, the list has to be traversed from the node marked head, with the help of a dummy node
current, and stop the counting when current reaches the starting node head. If the list is empty,
head will be NULL, and in that case set count = 0. Otherwise, set the current pointer to the first
node, and keep on counting till the current pointer reaches the starting node.

Time Complexity: O(n), for scanning the complete list of size n.
Space Complexity: O(1), for temporary variable.

Printing the contents of a circular list
We assume here that the list is being accessed by its head node. Since all the nodes are arranged
in a circular fashion, the tail node of the list will be the node previous to the head node. Let us
assume we want to print the contents of the nodes starting with the head node. Print its contents,
move to the next node and continue printing till we reach the head node again.

Time Complexity: O(n), for scanning the complete list of size n. Space Complexity: O(1), for
temporary variable.

Inserting a Node at the End of a Circular Linked List
Let us add a node containing data, at the end of a list (circular list) headed by head. The new
node will be placed just after the tail node (which is the last node of the list), which means it will
have to be inserted in between the tail node and the first node.
•

Create a new node and initially keep its next pointer pointing to itself.

•

Update the next pointer of the new node with the head node and also traverse the list
to the tail. That means in a circular list we should stop at the node whose next node
is head.

•

Update the next pointer of the previous node to point to the new node and we get the
list as shown below.

Time Complexity: O(n), for scanning the complete list of size n. Space Complexity: O(1), for
temporary variable.

Inserting a Node at the front of a Circular Linked List
The only difference between inserting a node at the beginning and at the end is that, after inserting
the new node, we just need to update the pointer. The steps for doing this are given below:
•

Create a new node and initially keep its next pointer pointing to itself.

•

Update the next pointer of the new node with the head node and also traverse the list
until the tail. That means in a circular list we should stop at the node which is its
previous node in the list.

•

Update the previous head node in the list to point to the new node.

•

Make the new node as the head.

Time Complexity: O(n), for scanning the complete list of size n. Space Complexity: O(1), for
temporary variable.

Deleting the last node in a Circular List
The list has to be traversed to reach the last but one node. This has to be named as the tail node,
and its next field has to point to the first node. Consider the following list. To delete the last node
40, the list has to be traversed till you reach 7. The next field of 7 has to be changed to point to
60, and this node must be renamed pTail.
•

Traverse the list and find the tail node and its previous node.

•

Update the tail node’s previous node pointer to point to head.

•

Dispose of the tail node.

Time Complexity: O(n), for scanning the complete list of size n. Space Complexity: O(1), for a
temporary variable.

Deleting the First Node in a Circular List
The first node can be deleted by simply replacing the next field of the tail node with the next field
of the first node.
•

Find the tail node of the linked list by traversing the list. Tail node is the previous
node to the head node which we want to delete.

•

Create a temporary node which will point to the head. Also, update the tail nodes
next pointer to point to next node of head (as shown below).

•

Now, move the head pointer to next node. Create a temporary node which will point
to head. Also, update the tail nodes next pointer to point to next node of head (as
shown below).

Time Complexity: O(n), for scanning the complete list of size n. Space Complexity: O(1), for a
temporary variable.

Applications of Circular List
Circular linked lists are used in managing the computing resources of a computer. We can use
circular lists for implementing stacks and queues.

Implementation

3.9 A Memory-efficient Doubly Linked List
In conventional implementation, we need to keep a forward pointer to the next item on the list and
a backward pointer to the previous item. That means, elements in doubly linked list
implementations consist of data, a pointer to the next node and a pointer to the previous node in
the list as shown below.
Conventional Node Definition

Recently a journal (Sinha) presented an alternative implementation of the doubly linked list ADT,
with insertion, traversal and deletion operations. This implementation is based on pointer
difference. Each node uses only one pointer field to traverse the list back and forth.
New Node Definition

The ptrdiff pointer field contains the difference between the pointer to the next node and the
pointer to the previous node. The pointer difference is calculated by using exclusive-or (⊕)
operation.

The ptrdiff of the start node (head node) is the ⊕ of NULL and next node (next node to head).
Similarly, the ptrdiff of end node is the ⊕ of previous node (previous to end node) and NULL. As
an example, consider the following linked list.

In the example above,
•
•
•
•

The next pointer of A is: NULL ⊕ B
The next pointer of B is: A ⊕ C
The next pointer of C is: B ⊕ D
The next pointer of D is: C ⊕ NULL

Why does it work?
To find the answer to this question let us consider the properties of ⊕:
X⊕X=0
X⊕0=X
X ⊕ Y = Y ⊕ X (symmetric)
(X ⊕ Y) ⊕ Z = X ⊕ (Y ⊕ Z) (transitive)

For the example above, let us assume that we are at C node and want to move to B. We know that
C’s ptrdiff is defined as B ⊕ D. If we want to move to B, performing ⊕ on C’s ptrdiff with D
would give B. This is due to the fact that,

Similarly, if we want to move to D, then we have to apply ⊕ to C’s ptrdiff with B to give D.

From the above discussion we can see that just by using a single pointer, we can move back and
forth. A memory-efficient implementation of a doubly linked list is possible with minimal
compromising of timing efficiency.

3.10 Unrolled Linked Lists
One of the biggest advantages of linked lists over arrays is that inserting an element at any
location takes only O(1) time. However, it takes O(n) to search for an element in a linked list.
There is a simple variation of the singly linked list called unrolled linked lists.
An unrolled linked list stores multiple elements in each node (let us call it a block for our
convenience). In each block, a circular linked list is used to connect all nodes.

Assume that there will be no more than n elements in the unrolled linked list at any time. To
simplify this problem, all blocks, except the last one, should contain exactly
elements. Thus,
there will be no more than
blocks at any time.

Searching for an element in Unrolled Linked Lists
In unrolled linked lists, we can find the kth element in O(
1.

):

Traverse the list of blocks to the one that contains the kth node, i.e., the
It takes O(

) since we may find it by going through no more than

block.
blocks.

2.

Find the (k mod
)th node in the circular linked list of this block. It also takes O(
) since there are no more than
nodes in a single block.

Inserting an element in Unrolled Linked Lists

When inserting a node, we have to re-arrange the nodes in the unrolled linked list to maintain the
properties previously mentioned, that each block contains
nodes. Suppose that we insert a
node x after the ith node, and x should be placed in the jth block. Nodes in the jth block and in the
blocks after the jth block have to be shifted toward the tail of the list so that each of them still
have
nodes. In addition, a new block needs to be added to the tail if the last block of the list
is out of space, i.e., it has more than
nodes.

Performing Shift Operation
Note that each shift operation, which includes removing a node from the tail of the circular linked
list in a block and inserting a node to the head of the circular linked list in the block after, takes

only O(1). The total time complexity of an insertion operation for unrolled linked lists is therefore
O( ); there are at most O( ) blocks and therefore at most O( ) shift operations.
1.

A temporary pointer is needed to store the tail of A.

2.

In block A, move the next pointer of the head node to point to the second-to-last node, so that
the tail node of A can be removed.

3.

Let the next pointer of the node, which will be shifted (the tail node of A), point to the tail
node of B.

4.

Let the next pointer of the head node of B point to the node temp points to.

5.

Finally, set the head pointer of B to point to the node temp points to. Now the node temp

points to becomes the new head node of B.

6.

temp pointer can be thrown away. We have completed the shift operation to move the
original tail node of A to become the new head node of B.

Performance
With unrolled linked lists, there are a couple of advantages, one in speed and one in space.
First, if the number of elements in each block is appropriately sized (e.g., at most the size of one
cache line), we get noticeably better cache performance from the improved memory locality.
Second, since we have O(n/m) links, where n is the number of elements in the unrolled linked list
and m is the number of elements we can store in any block, we can also save an appreciable
amount of space, which is particularly noticeable if each element is small.

Comparing Doubly Linked Lists and Unrolled Linked Lists
To compare the overhead for an unrolled list, elements in doubly linked list implementations
consist of data, a pointer to the next node, and a pointer to the previous node in the list, as shown
below.
Assuming we have 4 byte pointers, each node is going to take 8 bytes. But the allocation overhead
for the node could be anywhere between 8 and 16 bytes. Let’s go with the best case and assume it
will be 8 bytes. So, if we want to store 1K items in this list, we are going to have 16KB of
overhead.
Now, let’s think about an unrolled linked list node (let us call it LinkedBlock). It will look
something like this:

Therefore, allocating a single node (12 bytes + 8 bytes of overhead) with an array of 100
elements (400 bytes + 8 bytes of overhead) will now cost 428 bytes, or 4.28 bytes per element.
Thinking about our 1K items from above, it would take about 4.2KB of overhead, which is close
to 4x better than our original list. Even if the list becomes severely fragmented and the item arrays
are only 1/2 full on average, this is still an improvement. Also, note that we can tune the array
size to whatever gets us the best overhead for our application.

Implementation

3.11 Skip Lists
Binary trees can be used for representing abstract data types such as dictionaries and ordered
lists. They work well when the elements are inserted in a random order. Some sequences of
operations, such as inserting the elements in order, produce degenerate data structures that give
very poor performance. If it were possible to randomly permute the list of items to be inserted,
trees would work well with high probability for any input sequence. In most cases queries must
be answered on-line, so randomly permuting the input is impractical. Balanced tree algorithms rearrange the tree as operations are performed to maintain certain balance conditions and assure
good performance.
Skip list is a data structure that can be used as an alternative to balanced binary trees (refer to
Trees chapter). As compared to a binary tree, skip lists allow quick search, insertion and deletion
of elements. This is achieved by using probabilistic balancing rather than strictly enforce
balancing. It is basically a linked list with additional pointers such that intermediate nodes can be
skipped. It uses a random number generator to make some decisions.
In an ordinary sorted linked list, search, insert, and delete are in O(n) because the list must be
scanned node-by-node from the head to find the relevant node. If somehow we could scan down
the list in bigger steps (skip down, as it were), we would reduce the cost of scanning. This is the
fundamental idea behind Skip Lists.

Skip Lists with One Level

Skip Lists with Two Level

Skip Lists with Three Levels

This section gives algorithms to search for, insert and delete elements in a dictionary or symbol
table. The Search operation returns the contents of the value associated with the desired key or
failure if the key is not present. The Insert operation associates a specified key with a new value
(inserting the key if it had not already been present). The Delete operation deletes the specified
key. It is easy to support additional operations such as “find the minimum key” or “find the next
key”.
Each element is represented by a node, the level of which is chosen randomly when the node is
inserted without regard for the number of elements in the data structure. A level i node has i
forward pointers, indexed 1 through i. We do not need to store the level of a node in the node.
Levels are capped at some appropriate constant MaxLevel. The level of a list is the maximum
level currently in the list (or 1 if the list is empty). The header of a list has forward pointers at
levels one through MaxLevel. The forward pointers of the header at levels higher than the current
maximum level of the list point to NULL.

Initialization
An element NIL is allocated and given a key greater than any legal key. All levels of all skip lists
are terminated with NIL. A new list is initialized so that the the level of the list is equal to 1 and
all forward pointers of the list’s header point to NIL.

Search for an element
We search for an element by traversing forward pointers that do not overshoot the node containing
the element being searched for. When no more progress can be made at the current level of
forward pointers, the search moves down to the next level. When we can make no more progress
at level 1, we must be immediately in front of the node that contains the desired element (if it is in
the list).

Insertion and Deletion Algorithms
To insert or delete a node, we simply search and splice. A vector update is maintained so that
when the search is complete (and we are ready to perform the splice), update[i] contains a
pointer to the rightmost node of level i or higher that is to the left of the location of the
insertion/deletion. If an insertion generates a node with a level greater than the previous maximum

level of the list, we update the maximum level of the list and initialize the appropriate portions of
the update vector. After each deletion, we check if we have deleted the maximum element of the
list and if so, decrease the maximum level of the list.

Choosing a Random Level
Initially, we discussed a probability distribution where half of the nodes that have level i pointers
also have level i+1 pointers. To get away from magic constants, we say that a fraction p of the
nodes with level i pointers also have level i+1 pointers. (for our original discussion, p = 1/2).
Levels are generated randomly by an algorithm. Levels are generated without reference to the
number of elements in the list

Performance
In a simple linked list that consists of n elements, to perform a search n comparisons are required
in the worst case. If a second pointer pointing two nodes ahead is added to every node, the
number of comparisons goes down to n/2 + 1 in the worst case. Adding one more pointer to every
fourth node and making them point to the fourth node ahead reduces the number of comparisons to
⌈n/2⌉ + 2. If this strategy is continued so that every node with i pointers points to 2 * i – 1 nodes
ahead, O(logn) performance is obtained and the number of pointers has only doubled (n + n/2 +
n/4 + n/8 + n/16 + .... = 2n).
The find, insert, and remove operations on ordinary binary search trees are efficient, O(logn),
when the input data is random; but less efficient, O(n), when the input data is ordered. Skip List
performance for these same operations and for any data set is about as good as that of randomlybuilt binary search trees - namely O(logn).

Comparing Skip Lists and Unrolled Linked Lists
In simple terms, Skip Lists are sorted linked lists with two differences:
•
•

The nodes in an ordinary list have one next reference. The nodes in a Skip List have
many next references (also called forward references).
The number of forward references for a given node is determined probabilistically.

We speak of a Skip List node having levels, one level per forward reference. The number of
levels in a node is called the size of the node. In an ordinary sorted list, insert, remove, and find
operations require sequential traversal of the list. This results in O(n) performance per operation.
Skip Lists allow intermediate nodes in the list to be skipped during a traversal - resulting in an
